..
  #  YDK-YANG Development Kit
  #  Copyright 2016-2019 Cisco Systems. All rights reserved
  # *************************************************************
  # Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
  # or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
  # distributed with this work for additional information
  # regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
  # to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
  # "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
  # with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
  #
  #   http:#www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
  #
  #  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
  # software distributed under the License is distributed on an
  # "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
  # KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
  # specific language governing permissions and limitations
  # under the License.
  # *************************************************************
  # This file has been modified by Yan Gorelik, YDK Solutions.
  # All modifications in original under CiscoDevNet domain
  # introduced since October 2019 are copyrighted.
  # All rights reserved under Apache License, Version 2.0.
  # *************************************************************

Questions and Answers
=====================

Please join the `YDK community <https://communities.cisco.com/community/developer/ydk>`_ to get answers to any
YDK-related questions you may have.

How do I report a bug I found?
------------------------------

Please use the `YDK-Gen GitHub issue tracker <https://github.com/CiscoDevNet/ydk-gen/issues>`_ to report any bugs that you discovered.
Please use the `YDK community <https://communities.cisco.com/community/developer/ydk>`_ for any other questions.

I am interested in contributing. How do I do this?
--------------------------------------------------

YDK is an open-source project and we welcome contributions.
Please refer to this `brief guide <https://github.com/CiscoDevNet/ydk-gen/blob/master/CONTRIBUTIONS.md>`_,
make the changes on your fork of `ydk-gen <https://github.com/CiscoDevNet/ydk-gen>`_ and submit a pull request
`here <https://github.com/CiscoDevNet/ydk-gen/pulls>`_.

Can you help me change something in a model bundle API?
-------------------------------------------------------

The YDK model bundle APIs are autogenerated from `predefined sets of YANG models <https://github.com/CiscoDevNet/ydk-gen/tree/9c36cd1ab5c85c4017a784dc7175c75056e7b3fd/profiles/bundles>`_.
Please contact the owners of the respective YANG models to request any changes.

What version of YDK core can be used with YDK bundles?
------------------------------------------------------

Currently, we do not have a central location where the compatibility information between the YDK core and
the bundle APIs is maintained.
In general, we try to maintain backward compatibility between the releases of the core and bundles.

Check the `Backward Compatibility <https://ygorelik.github.io/ydk-gen/getting_started.html#backward-compatibility>`_ notes
for more information.

Also, we use the `ydk-gen/generate.py <https://github.com/ygorelik/ydk-gen>`_ script to generate and install the bundles.
This tool is available for anyone to use in order to generate the bundle version in combination with YDK core version of their choice.
For example, the below steps will generate & install the `cisco-ios-xr 6.5.1` bundle compatible with `ydk core 0.8.6`:

1) Install third party dependency software and core components

.. code-block:: sh

    git clone https://github.com/ygorelik/ydk-gen.git
    cd ydk-gen
    ./install_ydk.sh --core

2) Generate and install bundle after activating Python virtual environment that was automatically created in previous step.

.. code-block:: sh

    source ~/venv/bin/activate
    ./generate --bundle profiles/bundles/cisco-ios-xr_6_5_1.json -i
