..
  #  YDK-YANG Development Kit
  #  Copyright 2016-2019 Cisco Systems. All rights reserved
  # *************************************************************
  # Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
  # or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
  # distributed with this work for additional information
  # regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
  # to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
  # "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
  # with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
  #
  #   http:#www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
  #
  #  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
  # software distributed under the License is distributed on an
  # "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
  # KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
  # specific language governing permissions and limitations
  # under the License.
  # *************************************************************
  # This file has been modified by Yan Gorelik, YDK Solutions.
  # All modifications in original under CiscoDevNet domain
  # introduced since October 2019 are copyrighted.
  # All rights reserved under Apache License, Version 2.0.
  # *************************************************************

About YDK
=========

Overview
--------
The YANG Development Kit (YDK) is a software development tool, which provides API for building applications based on YANG models.
The main goal of YDK is to reduce the learning curve of YANG data models by expressing the model semantics in an API
and abstracting protocol/encoding details.  YDK is composed of a core package that defines services and providers,
plus one or more module bundles that are based on YANG models.

License
-------
Copyright 2016-2019 Cisco Systems. All rights reserved.

Copyright 2019-2021 YDK Solutions. All rights reserved.

Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at:

    `http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0 <http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0>`_

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.

Backwards Compatibility Notes
-----------------------------
Although YDK-0.9.0 API did not change much, it generates slightly different code and model API comparing to YDK-0.8.5.
However the Python model API generated by YDK releases starting from 0.7.3 is fully compatible with YDK-0.9.0.
Hence all model bundles located in `Python Package Index <https://pypi.org/search/?q=ydk>`_ could be installed and used in YDK-0.9.0.

**NOTE.** Starting from release 0.8.5 the YDK does not support Python2 interpreter as it was deprecated.

Version
-------
Current YDK version: version-id

..
    This ydk-language-version is generated using `ydk-gen <https://gitlab.com/yangorelik/ydk-gen>`_.

    To check out the version of ydk-gen used to generate this ydk-language-version, use the below commands:

    .. code-block:: bash
        :linenos:

        $ git clone repo-url
        $ git checkout commit-id


    Changelog
    ----------
     - `Changelog <https://gitlab.com/yangorelik/ydk-language-version/blob/master/CHANGES.md>`_
